Welcome to the first lecture on the course
on Programming Data Structures and Algorithm
in Python.
Let's start with the basic definition of what
we mean by an algorithm and what programming
is. As most of you probably know, an algorithm
is a description of how to systematically
perform some task. An algorithm consists of
a sequence of steps which can we think of
as a recipe in order to achieve something.
So, the word recipe of course, comes from
cooking where we have list of ingredients
and then a sequence of steps to prepare a
dish. So, in the same way an algorithm is
a way to prepare something or to achieve a
given task. So, in the context of our thing,
a recipe will is what we call a program. And
we write down a program using a programming
language. So, the goal of programming language
is to be able to describe the sequence of
steps that are required and to also describe
how we might pursue different sequences of
steps if different things happen in between.
The notion of a step is something that can
be performed by whatever is executing the
algorithm. Now a program need not be executed
by a machine although that will the typical
context of computer programming were we expect
a computer to execute our steps. A program
could also be executed by a person. For instance,
supposing the task at hand is to prepare a
hall for a function. So, this will consists
of different steps such as a cleaning the
room, preparing the stage, making sure the
decoration are up, arranging the chairs and
so on. This will be executed by a team of
people. Now depending on the expertise and
the experience of this group of people, you
can describe this algorithm at different levels
of detail.
For instance, an instruction such as arrange
the chair would makes sense if the people
involved know exactly what is expected. On
the other hand, if this is a new group of
people who have never done this before; you
might need to describe to step in more detail.
For instance, you might want to say that arrange
the chairs in the 8 rows and put 10 chairs
in each row. So, the notion of a step is subjective,
it depends on what we expect of the person
or the machine which is executing the algorithm.
And in terms of that capability, we describe
the algorithm itself.
Our focus in this course is going to be on
computer algorithms and typically, these algorithms
manipulate information. The most basic kind
of algorithm that all of us are familiar with
from high school is an algorithm that computes
numerical functions. For instance, we could
have an algorithm which takes two numbers
x and y, and computes x to the power y. So,
we have seen any number of such functions
in school.
For example, to compute square root of x,
so what we do in school is we have complicated
way to compute square root of x or we might
have x divided by y where we do long division
and so on. These are all algorithms, which
compute values given one or more numbers they
compute the output of this function.
But all of us who have used computers know
that many other things also fall within the
realm of computation. For instance, if we
use a spreadsheet to arrange information and
then we want to sort of column. So, this involves
rearranging the items in the column in some
order either in ascending order or descending
order. So, reorganizing information is also
a computational task and we need to know how
to do this algorithmically. We also see computation
around us in the day today’s life. For instance,
when we go to a travel booking site and we
try to book a flight from one city to another
city it will offer to arrange the flights
in terms of the minimum time or the minimum
cost. So, these are optimization problems.
This involves also arranging information in
a particular way and then computing some quantity
that we desire.
In this case, we want to know that a we can
get from a to b, and b among all the ways
we can get from a to b we want the optimum
one. And of course, there are many, many more
things that we see day today, which are executed
by computer programs. We can play games. For
instance, we can solve Sudoku or we can play
chess against a program. When we use the word
processor to type a document or even when
we use our cell phones to type sms messages,
the computer suggests correction in our spelling.
We will look at some of these things in this
course, but the point is to note that a program
in our context is anything that looks at information
and manipulates it to a given requirement.
So, it is not only a question of taking a
number in and putting the number out. It could
involve rearranging things. It could involve
computing more complicated things. It could
involve organizing the information in a particular
ways, so these computations become more tractable
and that is what we call a data structure.
So to illustrate this let us look at the function
which most of us have seen and try to understand
the algorithmically. So, the property that
I want to compute is the greatest common decide
divisor of two positive integers m and n.
So, as we know a divisor is a number that
divides. So k is a divisor of m; if I can
divide m by k and get no reminder. So, the
greatest common divisor of m and n must be
something which is a common divisor. So, common
means it must divide both and it must be the
largest of these. So, if the largest k such
that k divides m and k also divides m.
For instance, if we look at the number 8 and
12, then we can see that 4 is the factor of
8, 4 is the divisor of 8, 4 is also divisor
of 12, another divisor of 12 is 6, but 6 is
not a divisor of 8. So, if we go through the
divisors of 8 and twelve it is easy to check
that the largest number that divides both
8 and 12 is 4. So, gcd of 8 and 12 is 4. What
about 18 and 25. 25 is 5 by 5. So, it has
only one divisor other than 1 and 25, which
is 5. And 5 is not a divisor of 18, but fortunately
1 is a divisor of 18. So, we can say that
gcd of 18 and 25 is 1; there is no number
bigger than 1 that divides both 18 and 25.
Since 1 divides every number, as we saw in
the case of 18 and 25, there will always be
at least one common divisor among the two
numbers.
The gcd will always be well defined; it will
never be that we cannot find the common divisor
and because all the common divisors will be
numbers, we can arrange them from smallest
to largest and pick the largest one as the
greatest common divisor. So, given any pair
of positive number m and n, we can definitely
compute the gcd of these two numbers.
So, how would one go about computing gcd of
m, n? So, this is where we come to the algorithmic
way, we want to describe the uniform way of
systematically computing gcd of m n for any
m or any n. So, here is a very simple procedure.
It is not the most efficient; we will see
better once as we go along. But if we just
look at the definition of gcd it says look
at all the factors of m, look at all the factor
of n and find the largest one which is the
factor of both. So, the naive way to do this
would be first list out factors of m, then
list out all the factor of second number n
and then among these two lists report the
largest number that appears in both lists.
This is almost literally the definition of
gcd.
Now question is does this constitute an algorithm.
Well, at a high level of detail if we think
of list out factors as a single step, what
we want from an algorithm are two things.
One is that the description of what to do
must be written down in a finite way. In the
sense that I should be able to write down
the instruction regardless of the value m
and n in such a way it can read it and comprehend
it once and for all.
Here is very clear, we have exactly three
steps right. So, we have three steps at constitute
the algorithm so it certainly presented in
a finite way. The other requirement of an
algorithm is that we must get the answer after
a finite number of steps. Of this finite number
of steps may be different for different values
of m and n, you can imagine that if you have
a very small number for n there are not many
factors they are the very large number for
n you might have many factors. So, the process
of listing out the factors of m and n may
take a long time; however, we want to be guaranteed
that this process will always end and then
having done this we will always able to find
the largest number that appears in both lists.
To argue that this process is well defined
all we need to realize is that the factors
of m must be between 1 and m. In other words,
we although there are infinitely many different
possibility as factors we don't have to look
at any number bigger than m, because it cannot
go into m evenly. So, all we need to do to
compute the factors of m is to test every
number is range one to m and if it divides
m without a reminder, then we add it to list
of factors. So, we start with empty list of
factors and we consider it on 1, 2, 3, 4 up
to m and for each such number we check, whether
if we divide m by this number we get a reminder
of 0 we get a reminder of 0 we add it to the
list.
Let us look at the concrete example, let us
try to compute the gcd of 14 and 63. So, the
first step in our algorithm says to compute
the factors of 14. So, by our observation
above the factors of 14 must lie between one
and 14 nothing bigger than 14 can be a factor.
So, we start a listing our all the possible
factors between one and 14 and testing them.
So, we know of course, that 1 will always
divide; in this case 2 divides 14, because
14 dived by 2 is 7 with no remainder. Now
3 does not divide, 4 does not divide, 5 does
not divide, 6 does not divide; but 7 does,
because if we divide 14 by 7 we get a remainder
of 0. Then again 8 does not divide, nine does
not divide and so on.
And finally, we find that the only other factor
left is 14 itself. So for every number m - 1
and m will be factors and then there may be
factors in between.
So, having done this we have identified that
factors of 14 and these factors are precisely
the 1, 2, 7 and 14.
The next step in computing the gcd of 14 and
63 is to compute the factors of 63. So, in
the same way we write down the all the numbers
from one to 63 and we check which ones divide.
So, again we will find that 1 divides, here
2 does not divide; because 63 is not even,
3 does divides, then we find a bunch of numbers
here, which do not divide. Then we find that
7 divides, because 7 9's are 63. Then again
8 does not divides, but 9 does. Then again
there are large gap of numbers, which do not
divide. And then 21 does divide, because 21
3's are 63. And then finally, we find that
the last factor that we have is 63. So, if
we go through this systematically from one
to 63 crossing out each number which is not
a factor we end up with the list 1, 3, 7,
9, 21 and 63.
Having computed the factors of the two numbers
14 and 63 the next step in our algorithm says
that we must find the largest factor that
appears in both list. So, how do we do this,
how do we construct a list of common factors.
Now there are more clever ways to do this,
but here is a very simple way. We just go
through one of the lists say the list of factors
of 14 and for each item in the list we check
it is a factor of 63.
So, we start with 1 and we say does 1 appear
as a factor of 63. It does so we add to the
list of common factors. Then we look at 2
then we ask does it appear; it does not appear
so we skip it. Then we look at 3 and look
at 7 rather and we find that 7 does appear
so we add 7. Then finally, we look at 14 and
find that 14 does not appears so we skip it.
In this way we have systematically gone through
1, 2, 7 and 14 and concluded that of these
only 1 and 7 appear in both list.
And now having done this we have a list of
all the common factors we computed them from
smallest to biggest, because we went to the
factors of 14 in ascending order. So, this
list will also be in ascending order. So,
returning the largest factors just returns
the right most factor in this list namely
7. This is the output of our function. We
have computed the factors of 14, computed
the factors of 63, systematically checked
for every factor of 14, whether it is also
a factor of 63 and computed the list of common
factors here and then from this list we have
extracted the largest one and this in fact,
is our gcd. This is an example of how this
algorithm would execute.
If you have to write it down in little more
detail, then we could say that we need to
notice that we need to remember these lists,
right, and then come back to them. So, we
need to compute the factors of 14 keep it
side we need to write it down somewhere we
need to compute the factor of 63 write it
down somewhere and then compare these two
lists. So, in other words we need to assign
some names to store these. Let us call fm
for factors of m and fn factors of n as the
names of these lists. So, what we do is that
we run through the numbers one to m. And for
each i, in this list 1 to m we check, whether
i divide m, whether m divided by i as reminder
0 and if so we add it to the list factors
of m or fm. Similarly, for each j from 1 to
n we check, whether j divides n and if so
we add it to the list fn.
Now we have two lists fm and fn which are
the factors of m and factors of n. Now we
want to compute the list of common factors,
which we will call cf. So, what we do is for
every f that is a factor of a first number,
remember in our case was 14 where each f so
we ran through 1, 2, 7 and 14 in our case
right. So, for each f is list we add f to
the list of the common factors if it also
appears in the other list. So, in the other
list if you number is 1, 3, 7, 9, 21 and 63.
So, we compare f with this list and if we
find it we add it to cf.
And having done this now we want to return
the largest value of the list of common factors.
Remember that one will always be a common
factor. So, the list cf will not be empty.
There will be at least one value, but since
we add them in ascending order since the list
fm and fn, where constructed from 1 to m and
1 to n the largest value will also be the
right most value. This gives us a slightly
more detailed algorithm for gcd. It is more
or less same as previous one except spells
out little more details how to compute the
list of factors of m and how to compute the
list of factors of n and how to compute the
largest of common factor between these two
lists. So, earlier we had three abstract statements
now we are expanded out into 6, slightly more
detailed statements.
This already gives us enough information to
write our first python program. Of course,
we will need to learn little more, before
we know how to write it, but we can certainly
figure out how to read it. So, what this python
programming is doing is exactly what we described
informally in the previous step. The first
thing in the python program is a line which
defines the function. So, we are defining
a function gcd of m comma n. So, m and n are
the two arguments which could be any number
like any function. It's like when we read
f of x y in mathematics it means x and y are
arbitrator values and for every x and y do
something depending on the values that we
a call the function with. So, this says that
this is a definition, so def for definition
of a function gcd m, n.
Now the first step is to compute the list
of factors of m. In python we write a list
using square brackets. So, list is written
as x y z and so on. So, the empty list is
just an open bracket and a square close bracket.
So, we start off with an empty list of factors.
So, this equality means assign a value. So,
we assign fm the list of factors of m to be
the empty list. Now we need to test every
value in the range 1 to n.
Now python has a built in function called
range, but because of we shall see, because
of peculiarity of python this returns not
the range you except, but one less. So, if
I say give the numbers in the range 1 to n
plus 1, it gives me in the range one to m,
one up to the upper limit, but not including
the upper limit. So, this will say that i
takes the values one two three up to m. For
each of these values of i, we check whether
this is true. Now percentage is the remainder
operation.
It checks whether remainder of m divided by
i is 0. If the remainder of m divided by i
is 0 then we will append i to the list fn,
we will add it to the right append is the
English word which just means add to the end
of the list. So, we append i to n. So, in
this step, we have computed fm. This is exactly
what we wrote informally in the previous example
we just said that for each i from 1 to m add
i to fm if i divides m and now we have done
it in python syntax. So, we have defined an
empty list of factors and for each number
in that range we have checked it is a divisor
and then add it.
And now here we do the exactly the same thing
for n. So, we start with the empty list of
factors of n for every j in for this range
if it divides we append it. Now, at this point
we have two list fm and fn. Now, we want to
compute the list of common factors. So, we
use cf to denote the list of common factors.
Initially there are no common factors. Now,
for every factor in the first list if the
factor appears in the second list then we
append it to cf.
So, the same function append is being use
throughout. Just take a list and add a value.
Which value? We add the value that we are
looking at now provided it satisfies the conditions.
So, earlier we were adding provided the divisor
was 0 uh the remainder was 0, now we are adding
it provided it appears in both list. For every
f in the first list if it appears in the second
list add it.
After this we have computed fm, cf. And now
we want the right most element. So, this is
just some python syntax if you see which says
that instead of, if we start counting from
the left then the number the positions in
the list are number 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. But
python has a shortcut which says that you
want to count from the right then we count
the numbers as minus 1, minus 2 and so on.
So, it says return the minus 1'th element
of cf which in Python jargon means return
the right most element. So, this is the right
most element.
At this point it is enough to understand that
we can actually try and decode this code this
program even though we may not understand
exactly why we are using colon in some places
and why we are pushing something. See notice
that are other syntactic things here, so there
are for example, you have these punctuation
marks, which are a bit odd like these colons.
Then you have the fact that this line is indented
with respect to this line, this line is indented
to this line.
These are all features that make python programs
a little easier to read and write then programs
in other languages. So, we will come to these
when we learn python syntax more formally.
But at this point you should be able to convince
yourself that this set of python steps is
a very faithful rendering of the informal
algorithm that we wrote in the previous slide.
Let us note some points that we can already
deduce from this particular example. So, the
first important point is that we need a way
to keep track of intermediate values. So,
we have two names to begin with the names
of our arguments m and n. Then we use these
three names to compute this list of factors
and common factors and we use other names
like i, j and f. In order to run through these.
We need i to run from 1 to n. We need j to
run from 1 to n. Of course, we could reuse
i. But it is okay. We use f to run through
all the factors in cf. So, these are all ways
of keeping track of intermediate values. The
second point to note is that a value can be
a single item.
For example, m n are numbers, similarly i,
j and f at each step are numbers. So, these
will be single values or they could be collections.
So, there are lists. So fm is a list, fn is
a list. So, it is a single name denoting a
collection of values in this case a list a
sequence has a first position and next position
and a last position. These are list of numbers.
One can imagine the other collections and
we will see them as we go along. So, collections
are important, because it would be very difficult
to write a program if we had to keep producing
a name for every factor of m separately. We
need a name collectively for all the factors
of m regardless of how big m is. These names
can denote can be denote single values or
collections of values. And a collection of
values with the particular structure is precisely
what we call data structure. So, these are
more generally called data structures. So,
in this case the data structure we have is
a list.
What can we do with these names and values
well one thing is we can assigned a value
to a name. So, for instance when we write
fn is equal to the empty list we are explicitly
setting the value of fn to be the empty list.
This tells two things this says the value
is empyt list, so it is also tells python
the fn denotes the lists these are the two
steps going on here as we see.
And the other part is that when we write something
like for each f in the list cf, which is implicitly
saying that take every value in cf and assign
it one by one to the values f to the name
f. Right though they do not have this equality
sign explicitly implicitly this is assigning
the new values for f as we step the list cf
right. So, the main thing that we do in a
python program is to assign values to names.
And having assigned a value we can then modify
the value. For instance every time we find
a new factor of n we do not want to through
any old factor we want to take the existing
list fm and we want to add it. So, this function
append for instance modifies the value of
the name fn to a new name which takes the
old name and sticks an i at the end of it.
More generally you could have a number and
we could want a replaces by two times a number.
So, we might have something like i is equal
to two times i. So, star stands for multiplication
this does not mean that i is equals to two
times i arithmetically because; obviously,
unless i is 0 i cannot be equal to two times
itself. What is means is that take the current
value of i, multiply it by two and assign
it to i. So, we will see this as we go along,
but assignment can either assign a completely
new value or you could update the value using
the old value. So, here we taking the old
value of the function of the list fn and we
are appending a value it would getting a new
value of fn.
The other part that we are need to note is
how we execute steps. So, we said at the beginning
of today's lecture a program is a sequence
of steps. But we do not just execute the sequence
of steps from beginning to end blindly. Sometimes
we have to do the same thing again and again.
For instance we have to check for every possible
factor from 1 to m if it divides m and then
put it in the list. So, some steps are repeated
we do something, for examples here for each
item in a list.
And some steps are executed only if the value
that we are looking at meets particular conditions.
When we say something like if m percent i
is 0, if the remainder of m divided by a is
0 then append. So, the step append i to fm
the factors of m this happens only if i matches
the condition that it is a factor of m. So,
we have repeated steps where same thing done
again and again. And they have conditionals
steps something which is done only if a particular
condition holds.
So, we will stop here. These examples should
show you that programs are not very different
from what we know intuitively, it is only
a question of writing them down correctly,
and making sure that we keep track of all
the intermediate values and steps that we
need as we long, so that we do not lose things.
We will look at this example in more detail
as we go long, and try to find other ways
of writing it, and examine other features,
but essentially this is a good way of illustrating
programming.